Hello, I'm Professor Clark and today we get up close to earthquakes, but at a safe distance
We live on a dynamic planet in which the frequent rubbing of tectonic plates can often lead to devastating consequences for populated areas
We often hear about when we might expect the next big one
When we see earthquake zones, we are amazed at the amount of force that bends bridges, levels, large structures and topples landscapes
In today's lecture, I'd like to include a number of questions that are worth addressing in order to better understand the science behind this powerful natural phenomenon and the lessons there are to learn
The first question, of course, is about the mechanisms at play
Why do earthquakes happen? What causes an earthquake? A lot of ancient theories tried to explain this phenomenon, from the Japanese catfish to the Greek god of the sea
But what exactly is happening below the Earth's surface, or even the ocean's surface? The next question I'm going to talk about is the frequency of earthquake activity
How often do earthquakes occur? Do they happen somewhere on our planet every month or even every day? How many earth tremors does the planet experience in, say, a year? And is this frequency constant or changing over time? You can sometimes hear people discuss possible links between the frequency of earthquakes and changes in the climate
Are such concerns valid? Another question that people often ask is about regions which are particularly prone to earthquakes
Are there areas that are more high risk than others? The answer to this question is important, because it might make a difference to how we manage earthquakes in the future
A further interesting area we will spend some time talking about today is how earthquake data is collected and used on a global scale
Is there a seismologist team monitoring our planet? What do they measure and detect? These questions, in turn, lead us to the critical issue of prediction, which is our next question
Is earthquake prediction possible, and if so, is it reliable? Can we predict earthquakes with a level of confidence, or is it like a horse race with odds? How do you actually measure risk? Another interesting area, and a rather important one, as it has the potential to inform policies that relate to a number of industries, is the question of whether any human activities are linked to earthquakes
Things like mining or groundwater use, for example
Do we know if these contribute to the bigger picture of earthquakes? This is a contentious matter, making it so much more critical that evidence-based scientific data be available to policymakers
One final problem to cover today is related to managing the impact, including minimizing both human and economic losses
We've been watching earthquakes for our entire history on this planet, and so the final question is, what have we learned about how to prepare for and recover from an earthquake? Where can we improve in our management of this natural disaster? So, let's now turn to our first question of why earthquakes happen.
